DOCS-3613: Iterate on Connect Devices (#4037)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/operate/get-started/setup.md

  - /get-started/installation/
---

Get started by installing [`viam-server`](/operate/reference/viam-server/), the open-source software that drives your hardware and connects your device to the cloud.

## Prerequisite: Make sure you have a supported operating system

`viam-server` can run on any computer that runs one of the following operating systems:

- Linux 64-bit operating systems running on AArch64 (ARM64) or x86-64 architectures
- macOS

> - Windows

Reviewer: This is duplicated info and probably now doesn't need to be. For Linux it provides a bit more info which you can put in the LInux tab instead.

Also please ensure this is correct. I think we'd want to cover the 32-bit ARM version we support as well?

Author: Ok moved the info. RE 32-bit ARM, I'm talking to Abe about it and he's going to check setup instructions for it next week. I'll track here https://viam.atlassian.net/browse/DOCS-3671

> For 32-bit microcontrollers, see [Set up an ESP32](/operate/get-started/setup-micro/).

Reviewer: this should be at the end of the section, not above the command you want them to run

Author: Yeah with the above coming out I will move it. If that was staying it, i worried people would scan that quickly and think no esp32 support. Removing!

  - /get-started/installation/
---

> Get started by installing [`viam-server`](/operate/reference/viam-server/),the open-source software that drives your hardware and connects your device to the cloud.

Author: ```suggestion
Get started by installing [`viam-server`](/operate/reference/viam-server/), the open-source software that drives your hardware and connects your device to the cloud.
```

{{< expand "Supported systems" >}}

`viam-server` can run on any computer that runs one of the following operating systems:

- Linux 64-bit operating systems running on AArch64 (ARM64) or x86-64 architectures
- macOS
- Windows
  - Native: Use native if you are using a WSL version prior to WSL 2 or need native USB support
  - WSL: Use WSL if you are using Python modules or other Linux dependencies

`viam-server` can run on Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL), but WSL itself does not currently support exposing many types of Windows hardware to the embedded Linux kernel.
This means that some hardware, such as a connected webcam, may not be available to `viam-server` with WSL, even though it is fully supported for native Linux systems.

For 32-bit systems, see [Set up an ESP32](/operate/get-started/setup-micro/).

> {{< /expand >}}

Reviewer 2: This seems very similar to the "What platforms does Viam run on?" section in "Learn the basics."

I think we should just have the content in one of the two places.

If it makes more sense here, I think we could move this out of the dropdown, call it "Supported operating systems", and move the carousel here. That would also mirror the "Supported microcontrollers" section at the top of "Set up an ESP32"

Author: So yes it is very similar, but this is where we get into the question of, do people land on this page first, and does it need to function independently? I definitely think they might, from either docs search, or google etc search, or chatbot, or another page like a tutorial that links here. With it hidden in the expander, what's the harm?

Reviewer 2: Agree that people may land here first. If we move the boards carousel here, this page will actually contain more content (and perhaps more detail) about which platforms we support, and the section in "Learn the basics" is more of a light intro. In that case, can we keep the content here but move it out of the expander?

The reason I'm suggesting this is it feels like important information that should be prominent (not behind an expander) somewhere, and I think I agree this is the place for putting the more detailed version.

Author: per offline convo for transparency: decided to combine the supported section expander and the prereq expander on the viam-server install page, and leave this as-is

  - /get-started/installation/
---

Get started by installing [`viam-server`](/operate/reference/viam-server/), the open-source software that drives your hardware and connects your device to the cloud.

> ## Prerequisite: Make sure you have a supported operating system

Reviewer 3: instead of this text, can we use code to make it *super* clear immediately:
linux:
```bash
arch=$(uname -m); bits=$(getconf LONG_BIT); [[ ("$arch" == "x86_64" || "$arch" == "aarch64") && "$bits" == "64" ]] && echo "✅ Your system can run viam-server" || echo "❌ Your system cannot run viam-server"
```
macos
```bash
[[ "$(uname -s)" == "Darwin" && ("$(uname -m)" == "x86_64" || "$(uname -m)" == "arm64") ]] && echo "✅ Your system can run viam-server" || echo "❌ Your system cannot run viam-server"
```
windows
```
(Get-WmiObject -Class Win32_OperatingSystem).OSArchitecture -eq "64-bit" -and (wsl --status 2>$null) -ne $null ? "✅ Your system can run viam-server" : "❌ Your system needs WSL for viam-server"
```

Author: Interesting. When you say "instead of this text" do you mean this entire section? Replacing this might be intimidating to some users, and for any user, they'd need to have access to their terminal. If someone's looking at the docs on their phone/on the go and/or they're not super technical, this might make it less clear.

I could add each of these lines to the bottom of the relevant expander below--maybe that's what you're suggesting?

Reviewer 3: no, definitely not suggesting adding to this section, i'm suggesting trying to simplify or make it more procedural.  this feels like a good example of a place where it feels we are overcomplicating things.  i know these are not identical since its OS vs OS+arch, but compare these two:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/bebc6ca8-c347-48d6-b4b4-9328f0868a43)
vs
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ec598ddc-2862-4331-82d3-915dfa857926)

so my thought process is:

we're telling people that they need to run on a certain arch.  if they know the arch of their system, they're done here.  if they *don't* then the first thing they need to do is figure out their arch.  how do they do that?  they google.  what does google tell them?  run certain commands.  so why not just cut straight back to the beginning and give them the commands?

i would assume this whole section could be boiled to something like:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ba77d5c5-be25-437d-bccc-eac52dcb3d91)

{{< /expand >}}

For 32-bit systems, see [Set up an ESP32](/operate/get-started/setup-micro/).

## Install `viam-server` and connect your machine to the cloud

Install `viam-server` on the computer or single-board computer (SBC) that is directly connected to your hardware (for example sensors, cameras, or motors).

1. Make sure your computer or SBC is powered on and connected to the internet.

1. Create a [Viam app](https://app.viam.com) account.
   The Viam app is the online hub for configuring and managing devices and data.

1. Add a new _{{< glossary_tooltip term_id="machine" text="machine" >}}_ using the button in the top right corner of the **LOCATIONS** tab in the app.
   A machine represents your device.

1. From your machine's page in the Viam app, follow the setup instructions to install `viam-server` on your device and connect it to the cloud.

1. A secure connection is automatically established between your machine and the Viam app.
   When you update your machine's configuration, `viam-server` automatically gets the updates.

   You are ready to [configure supported hardware](/operate/get-started/supported-hardware/) on your machine.

> ## The details

Reviewer 3: are we sure this should be here instead of in the reference?

Author: Yes. The details here are directly related to the content above, and people don't have to read it, but if they need it they won't find it in reference.

Reviewer: Can you explain why they won't find this in reference content? It does to me feel like a bit of a dumping ground and the title being so unspecific does also indicate that. I think mainly because the "How the configuration works" feels out of place - we haven't yet configured anything. So should that be with the next page? 

Then you'd be left with two pieces of info that are about the insntallation only. Though I am also wonderign if the agent vs manual should be with Step 4 instead or whether it's even needed at all. It may be that we have enough info in App now on this that we don't need this. Thoughts?

Author: Based on user interviews and other feedback, a few things seem true about reference:
- No one looks in reference, especially because it's collapsed, and because "Reference" sounds scary/like too much
- People are confused by the different reference contents across sections
- People wouldn't know what they were even looking for, especially for how viam-server connects to the app. If someone was curious maybe they'd ask the chatbot but I doubt they'd dig through reference.

Also user feedback has been incredibly positive on the current Start a Machine page which includes all this. Perhaps I should actually pull "What is a machine" back onto this page in case folks don't read the overview.

I do think there's confusion about how all the pieces tie together, and this is one of those pieces, basically answering "What does me setting up my machine in the app actually *do* and how does that fit in with all the other pieces of Viam, and does my machine have to always be online?" This content is about the connection between the app and the machine which is established through these steps, so it is relevant here.

I don't think there's quite enough information about viam-agent vs manual in the app. I will make this section hidden content though and hope the curious will ask AI.

{{< /expand >}}

1. Make sure your computer or SBC is powered on and connected to the internet.

1. Create a [Viam app](https://app.viam.com) account.
   The Viam app is the online hub for configuring and managing devices and data.

1. Add a new _{{< glossary_tooltip term_id="machine" text="machine" >}}_ using the button in the top right corner of the **LOCATIONS** tab in the app.
   A machine represents your device.

1. From your machine's page in the Viam app, follow the setup instructions to install `viam-server` on your device and connect it to the cloud.

1. A secure connection is automatically established between your machine and the Viam app.
   When you update your machine's configuration, `viam-server` automatically gets the updates.

>    [You are ready to configure your machine's hardware ->](/operate/get-started/supported-hardware/)

Reviewer 2: Similar to on "Learn the basics", could we make the link text match the left nav item?

Author: ```suggestion
   You are ready to [configure supported hardware](/operate/get-started/supported-hardware/) on your machine.
```
